So now that I've shown
you several different ways
of programming with the
Java Fork-Join pool,
let's take a step back and
evaluate what we've seen.
So there's obviously going to
be pros and cons to what we've
looked at here.
I think it's fair to say that
the iterative Fork-Join model,
the one that was shown in
the apply all iter method,
is very simple to
program, relatively
simple to understand once you
understand what fork and join
does.
So that's a very
simple approach.
However, it also incurs
more work stealing.
If you take a look at the
different work stealing counts,
its work stealing
count is much higher
than everybody else's,
pretty much double some
of the other ones.
These tests were all
conducted on my six core hyper
threaded Windows laptop
with 64 megabytes of RAM.
And actually, it's
not megabytes.
I think it's gigabytes.
So this basically goes ahead
and has lots of steals.
As a consequence, the
performance isn't very good.
So that's the downside
with using this approach.
It's easy to program, but it
doesn't perform as well as some
of the other approaches.
In contrast, the approaches that
used recursive decomposition
incur fewer steals.
So they don't steal as much,
because they recursively
decompose, and you end up with
a much better balanced tree
of tasks in the
forking and joining.
And as a consequence,
no surprise,
the performance is better.
And obviously, there
are other factors here
that also improve performance.
For example, the apply all split
index and apply all split index
EX methods do much less copy.
In fact, the apply all
split index EX method,
that's the one that
we pass the array
as a final parameter, a fourth
parameter, to the method.
That one is the fastest.
So going to be
less data copying,
still some recursive
calls, but in general, you
can see that those overheads
really do, in fact,
matter when we take a look
at which one runs the best.
However, these approaches are
more complicated to program.
So you kind of have
to pick your poison.
You either get
simplicity of programming
with less performance or you
get more complicated programming
with higher performance.
And you might think
to yourself, gosh,
is there any other way to go?
And we'll talk about another
way to go in a second.
And it's also fair to say that
the recursive decomposition
approach ends up with
more method calls,
because it's recursive, so
you've got to do extra work.
Another thing to note is that
the recursive actions overhead
is lower than the
recursive tasks overhead.
And that, again, is
because of the fact
that we're kind of
passing in this array
or using this array
in order to be
able to store the
results directly
rather than having to
join things together
through sub lists.
So that will also give you a bit
of a performance boost as well.
However, the recursive
action approach
is pretty idiosyncratic,
especially
when we deal with generic code.
So it took me a little
while to figure out
the magic to make this
particular method work.
That's why I ended up devising
the apply all split index
EX version, because I was
like, this is just too hideous.
But it does kind of work.
It's just pretty ugly.
Changing the API, as we saw,
can help reduce the complexity.
So we passed in an
array of results
rather than having
to fish things
out using Java Reflection
in this goofy idiom here.
Now, the ironic
part of all this,
after going through
all of the discussions
about the Fork-Join pool and the
different models and recursive
decomposition versus
iterative work stealing,
blah, blah, blah, it turns out
that the most concise solution
to this problem simply involves
the use of our good friend
parallel streams, which
we've talked about before.
So just for kicks, I wrote yet
another implementation, which
I'm going to walk
through here now,
called apply parallel stream.
And you can see it
takes a list and an op.
Obviously it doesn't
take a Fork-Join pool,
because it doesn't get a chance
to do anything other than use
the common Fork-Join pool.
So here's what it does.
It goes ahead and converts the
list into a parallel stream.
So we pass in the list.
We say, hey, make this
a parallel stream.
Nothing else really to do
to make parallelism work.
We then go ahead and call the
map intermediate operation
passing in the op function.
And of course, that
will then apply the op
to every element in
the stream in parallel.
And then we go ahead and
we collect all those items
together into an array
list and return that
as the result of the apply
parallel stream method.
Pretty interesting, right?
That sure looks a
lot more concise.
If you understand
parallel streams,
it probably takes
you about 10 seconds
to figure out what's going on,
whereas taking a look at code
like this or the code like
that, you're like, hm,
what the heck is going on here?
You could write this code.
Maybe you can read
this code maybe,
but it sure takes a
while to get your head
around what it's
trying to do and trying
to debug it and so on.
Whereas this approach here is
really, really straightforward.
Now, the proof is in
the pudding, right?
What is the consequence
of doing this?
And so when you run
this code, you'll
notice a couple of
interesting things.
First of all, you'll
notice that the steal count
for the parallel
stream version is
pretty much on par
with the steal count
for the other recursive
decomposition versions, which
is no real surprise, because
obviously, parallel streams
works by recursive decomposition
just like our various apply
all split methods do.
And then if you look
at the performance,
it's really not that far off.
So it's not as fast
as the apply all
split index EX
method, which does
sort of the super
optimized approach.
But it's only roughly about
100 milliseconds slower.
So it's not a factor
of two slower.
And it is definitely
faster than the apply
all iter approach, which
executes the slowest
of these approaches.
So I think the way to take this
is that in many, many use cases
nowadays, using parallel streams
will perform quite well, quite
competitive, with
alternative approaches.
And I think it's no
question that it's
much, much easier to program.
So this is actually no
surprise, because if you
stop to think about it, one
of the reasons why the Java 8
development team added streams
and parallel streams to Java
was to provide this much more
concise, much more convenient
functional programming
wrapper around
the powerful and scalable but
somewhat hard to program object
oriented Fork-Join pool that
had been added in Java 7.
And I think this example
really demonstrates
why that was a
win, because we can
get pretty much comparative
performance at a fraction
of the programming effort.
So unlike our earlier discussion
where we were like, well,
we gotta pick our poison when we
do Fork-Join pool programming.
Do we make it easy to program
but slower or harder to program
and faster?
With parallel streams, you
just write the parallel stream.
And as you can
see, the framework
does a pretty darn good
job of optimizing things
under the hood.
And so we end up with
comparative performance
at a fraction of the effort to
develop, understand, and make.